			COPYRIGHT restrictions

The source code shipped with this library is subject to the GNU LIBRARY
GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE, please look at the file COPYING.LIB that comes with
this distribution.  If not, write to the
  Free Software Foundation, Inc., 675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

NOTE:   
There are lots of files subject to other Copyrights, especially those
Copyright by the Regents of the University of California.  In those cases,
the specified Copyright restriction applies TO EACH SUCH SINGLE FILE, but
not the arrangement of putting it in this library.  This restriction should
enforce the consistency of this library.

After reading the COPYING.LIB file, you'll notice, that a program that just
uses the library by using OpenLibrary(), and calling functions in it, is to
be considered as a `work that uses the Library', and 5.  of COPYING.LIB
says for this case:  " Such a work, in isolation, is not a derivative work
of the Library, and therefore falls outside the scope of this License."

Since the glue functions created by compiling and running gen_glue.c (in
glue) are declared to be in the Public Domain (thus not to be covered by
any license), your compiled and linked executable will NOT become a
derivative of the library, and will thus not be subject to this license.
Thus, you may use the compiled version of the glue files and the other
standard library functions, libc.a and crt0.o in a commercial product
without making it a derivative of the library and thus make it subject to
the library license.  However, you must tell your customers that
ixemul.library and ixnet.library are free software according to this
license, and where they can get a copy of its source code.  The easiest way
to ensure that you remain in compliance with all licenses is to ship a copy
of the ixemul source code with each copy of the binary ixemul.library and
ixnet.library files.
