.de Sp
.if n .sp
.if t .sp 0.4
..
.TH IXTIMEZONE 8
.SH NAME
ixtimezone \- allows Unix timezone-handling to be used with ixemul.library
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ixtimezone
option
.br
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Ixtimezone
uses the
.B TZ
environment variable to determine the offset in seconds between Universal
Coordinated Time (aka Greenwich Mean Time) and the local timezone. This
offset is stored in a field in the ixemul library base. The offset is also
written to the environment variable
.BR IXGMTOFFSET .
The 
.I ixemul.library
is now able to correctly determine the local time and
GMT.
.LP
The
.B TZ
environment variable should contain the name of one of the files in the
.B /etc/zoneinfo
directory. For example, I live in the Netherlands, so my
.B TZ
is set to
.BR Europe/Amsterdam .
The
.B TZ
environment variable
.I must
be set before using
.IR ixtimezone ,
otherwise
.I ixtimezone
wouldn't know what the local timezone is, and therefore it wouldn't be able
to compute the offset from GMT.
.LP
You should put
.I ixtimezone
in your
.B startup-sequence
to ensure that it is called every time you start your computer. After
.I ixtimezone
has been executed, you can set
.B TZ
to whatever value you want. For example, to see what time it is in Japan,
set
.B TZ
to
.B Japan
and type
.I ixtimezone
.IR \-test .
But don't use any other option, as the other options set the GMT offset based on the
current
.B TZ
value, which is
.BR Japan !
.LP
Note that you need to call this tool at least twice a year, when
Daylight Saving Time comes in effect and when it ends.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-test
Print the local time and GMT (according to 
.IR ixemul.library )
to standard output.
Use this to test the current settings. It doesn't affect anything else.
.TP
.B \-get\-offset
Calculate the difference between local time and GMT in seconds. The
resulting offset is stored in the library base of
.I ixemul.library
and is also written to the global environment variable
.BR IXGMTOFFSET .
.Sp
If the
.B IXGMTOFFSET
environment variable didn't exist or the offset stored in the original
environment variable differed from the new offset (which happens when
Daylight Saving Time starts or ends), then a copy of
.B IXGMTOFFSET
is written to the
.B ENVARC:
directory.
.Sp
Since
.I ixemul.library
reads the
.B IXGMTOFFSET
environment variable just after it is loaded into memory, it is
sufficient to use
.I ixtimezone
only when Daylight Saving Time starts or ends. Provided, of course, that
the contents of the
.B ENVARC:
directory is copied to 
.B ENV:
before
.I ixemul.library
is loaded.
.TP
.B \-check\-dst
This option does the same as
.BR \-get\-offset ,
but it also detects if Daylight Saving Time has started or ended. If so, it
automatically sets the Amiga clock to the correct time. So you no longer
need to change the time manually twice a year.
.TP
.B \-patch\-resource
This option does the same as
.BR \-get\-offset ,
but it also patches the
.IR battclock.resource .
This is most useful if you also run the Unix operating system on your Amiga
(NetBSD or Linux, for example). Unix requires that the clock is set to
Greenwich Mean Time, while the Amiga requires that the clock is set to
local time. By patching the 
.I battclock.resource
one can set the Amiga clock, which is managed by the
.IR battclock.resource ,
to GMT time. The patch ensures that whenever the Amiga wants to
obtain the time, the GMT time is converted into local time. There is also
no longer any need to change the Amiga clock when Daylight Saving Time starts or
ends, since the battery clock is set to GMT.
.Sp
.I ixtimezone
detects if you try to patch the
.I battclock.resource
a second time. It won't patch the resource again, but it will check if the
current GMT offset is still the same as when the patch was originally
installed. If it has changed, the
.I battclock.resource
offset will also be changed.
.TP
.B \-remove\-patch
Removes the 
.I battclock.resource
patch. It checks if the patch was really installed before removing it.
This option doesn't do anything else.
.SH FILE
/etc/zoneinfo	standard directory used for created files
.SH HISTORY
The original idea for the 
.B \-patch\-resource
option came from the
.I unixclock
utility written by Geert Uytterhoeven.
.I unixclock
is available on Aminet.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
The time functions, the timezone databases and the
.IR zic (8)
utility for compiling the timezone files in the
.B /etc/zoneinfo
directory are available from
.I elsie.nci.nih.gov
in the
.B /pub
directory.
.SH AUTHOR
Hans Verkuil
.RI ( hans@wyst.hobby.nl )
